TODO -- i'm not focusing on metroidbraina, maybe nix that and just title it
Outer Wilds and focus on the game itself. This opens me up to being able to talk
about 1) what I'm actually qualified to talk about (themes! gameplay! Physics?)
2) why people should buy the game and play it (have two versions, one spoiler
black-texted and the other not? Or just two different articles)


# Outer Wilds

**Spoiler warning**. This post talks about [Outer
Wilds](https://www.mobiusdigitalgames.com/outer-wilds.html), my favourite video
game of all time. Unlike most games, spoilers are a very sensitive topic. It
won't just ruin the story or make it too easy, it will fundamentally make the
game unplayable once you know how it fits together. This makes the game unique,
but also makes it very difficult to convince people to try it out.

Take a gander at the trailer. If the game looks at all interesting you should 
stop reading and just go play it. I'll basically be spoiling everything, DLC 
included, so no more warnings after this.

## What is Outer Wilds

In Outer Wilds the player character is stuck in a time loop. At the end of the
22 minute time loop the Sun in the solar system you are exploring goes 
supernova. You, and everything else in the solar system, are vaporized.

When you wake back up at the campfire after your untimely death all of your
progress in the world is reset -- characters don't remember meeting you, doors
you opened are closed again, and the celestial bodies of the solar system reset
to their original position and velocity.

The central theme of the game is curiosity and learning. Because your progress
is blocked only by your knowledge (it is possible to beat the game during the
first loop on a fresh save) the main drive is to hunt down the answers to the
questions the game presents you with. Why is the Sun going supernova? Why are
you stuck in a time loop? Are either of those questions linked to the ancient
alien race, known as the Nomai, that mysteriously died out thousands of years
ago?

The only indication of your progress is your ship's computer log and the
conversations you can have with the other travelers scattered throughout the
solar system. As you learn new pieces of information your ship will keep track
of it so it can be easily reviewed later. This knowledge also unlocks new
conversations with the travelers. Sharing a new fact about their relevant 
field of study or the celestial body they inhabit will both excite and terrify 
your stellar compatriots into revealing even more information.

TODO Add a footnote that the ability to sleep used to be only available past the
third loop, but is now an ability in the game from the get-go.

I've seen this game described as a "Metroidbrainia". The only barrier to
progressing in the game is the player's knowledge of the situation. With only
two exceptions, namely the launch codes and the ability to meditate, the 
player doesn't gain any new abilities that persist between loops. While there
are items that change what the player can do, such as the suit which provides a
jetpack and the Artifact in the DLC which grants access to the dream world, when
the player wakes up each loop they need to pick up these items again in order to
utilize them.

## 


TODO I will probably delete the background section. It's long and others can
explain it better than I.

## Metroidvania background

Metroidbrainia is a derivative of the portmanteau "Metroidvania". In 1986 two
games came out around the same time that had a similar take on game progression.
Most games, especially in 1986, are linear affairs -- first there's level 1, 
then level 2, and so on. There may be optional content or alternative paths,
but both the gameplay and the story was strictly linear. 

1986's Metroid and Castlevania had *non*-linear progression. Like games that
came before there would be obstacles such a locked door or a ledge too high to
jump up to that would block further progression. However, while other games had
a strict order in which new abilities or items could be acquired in these games
you could do it in any order. 

The only way this works is by having a large, interconnected world. When a
locked door is placed in the path of the player the game is telling the player
"go somewhere else". Chances are, they'll find the solution somewhere far, far
away from the door itself.

Large, open world games are nothing new in the 21st century, but it's important
to distinguish the difference between, say, Grand Theft Autos 5's open world map
and Metroid's.

GTA 5's world is very big, although there are much bigger ones. To keep the
player from getting lost visual cues and fail states are utilized during
missions to keep them on track. Waypoints tell the player where to go, the
minimap draws a line on the road showing the most efficient route to a
destination, the player always has access to the world map, and if they deviate
too far from a mission site then the game will reset to a known good state.

I'm embarrassed to admit I have not actually played any Metroid or Castlevania
games, so while I'm familiar with the concept my only real experience is through
smaller elements of the concept embedded in other games.

## What is a "Metroidbrainia"

In Metroid you unlock new areas by gaining new abilities. In Outer Wilds you
access new areas by gaining knowledge. With a few exceptions, the player
character never gains new abilities. All of the progression is stored in the
player's brain. That's why this game is so sensitive to spoilers. Once you know,
you know forever.

A first playthrough of Outer Wilds is equal parts confusing, annoying, and
exhilarating. You are presented with a hostile, alien solar system where the
only people who want to help you understand the universe are dead. Their
knowledge and tools are all there, ready to be put to use, but the path to
understanding is blocked by painful temporary setbacks.

Outside of the initial tutorial, which takes around 30 minutes to an hour to
complete, nothing is explained to you. You'll stumble upon a device on the moon
clearly designed to locate a celestial object, but it doesn't work. How it
works, what it's trying to find, why it failed, or why you should care is
withheld from you. A few snippets of conversation from the long dead species
that built it only gives brief glimpses of the answer.

The game psychologically frustrates you, with answers to questions usually
begetting even more questions. Lines of inquery will have frequent dead ends. A
piece of text will describe a warp pad and the need for "alignment" in order for
it to function. You wait forever on the warp pad for this "alignment" only to be
interrupted by the supernova consuming you, the warp pad, and the space station
you're stranded on.

Even if the player is clever enough to figure out the obtuse puzzles, early on
the player will likely to die from the forces of nature before they can solve
them. This not just limited to be cooked like a marshmallow by the supernova.
Playing Outer Wilds means contending with frustrating deaths while trying to
get back to the puzzle you were trying to solve 3 loops ago.

Your auto pilot will helpfully take your ship through the sun while trying to
reach a planet on the other side. You'll be reading some ancient Nomai text but
be rudely interrupted by the ground collapsing beneath your feet as you get
sucked into the black hole tearing the planet apart. Rumors of a hidden 
underground city will lead you to a cave you will get lost and eventually 
perish in when the sand falling from the planet's twin fills up the cave and 
crushes you. While huffing and puffing trying to navigate a water planet with
twice the gravity you're used to a tornado will lift you, your ship, and the
entire island your on out of the storm into orbit. Suddenly weightless, your
panicked attempts to get back to the safety of your ship are doused as you
re-enter the atmosphere and are dashed against the rocks by the intense gravity
of the colossal gas giant. You will, at least once, leave your ship and 
forget to put on your life-preserving space suit and asphyxiate.

The universe does not care about you. It is harsh and unforgiving. If it were
not for the time loop your Hearthian would have had a very short, and painful, 
life.

TODO Travelers, actually the hearthians as a species, are more curious than
afraid. They are risking their lives for the pursuit of knowledege. This
contrasts well with the Strangers which I should mention before I get to this
point maybe?

## Other games in the Metroidbrainia family

### Toki Tori 2

### Tunic

### The Witness


---
